If the consumer is weak and housing is
weak, um, you know, to me that's that's
enough to kind of say like, you know
what, it's going to be very difficult
for the economy to
not have a recession.
>> Hi everyone, I'm Gunjen Banerjee
>> and I'm Telus Deeos. Welcome to another
episode of WSJ's Take on the Week. So
Gunjen, it seems like we're back on Fed
watch in the markets these days. Do you
do you agree the inflation reports have
driven Fed expectations and that's moved
the market. Is that is that your sense
of it?
>> Seems like the big bet in the market
right now is that the Fed is going to
cut rates at its September meeting and
that's helped the stock market.
>> Yeah. And we've got more economic data
this upcoming week on the housing market
that I really think that we should dig
into and that'll be the big conversation
for this week. But I do want to just
talk a little bit about backwards
looking at the inflation reports that
have come recently. We had a consumer
price index report that while itself
wasn't especially hot um had some
interesting elements in it. It had a
slowdown in something very important
which is shelter costs right like what
we people pay in rent and to live and
that's really important and uh it didn't
show a huge pickup in goods inflation
which is sort of the tariffs thing.
services inflation was still running
hot, but it seemed like the reaction to
it overall was that it could support a
Fed cut in September.
>> That's right. So, the S&P 500 hit its
16th record of the year after that CPI
report. Right. We're back at all-time
highs. And I think the impact of tariffs
on markets on on goods inflation has
just not been as straightforward as a
lot of people thought just a few months
ago. But we did have a bit of a reversal
when the producer price index which
measure wholesale prices came out and
that was hotter than expected. Um and so
that's an indication that maybe
companies are paying a little bit more
to make the stuff that they sell to you.
And the market went down on that news.
We had Mary Dailyaly uh talking to the
Wall Street Journal. She said that a 50
point or half point cut in interest
rates would maybe send the wrong signal
about how weak the jobs market is. We
had of course that you know not so great
labor market report but wasn't terrible
in her view and so 50 basis points or
half point would be too much. We also
had Austin Goulsby who's been on our
show before and who based on that we
know isn't totally averse to cutting
rates but he said that he's still not
convinced that a cut is the next move.
So it seems like that's the direction of
travel maybe is that we're not so sure
about a cut now.
>> The the market does seem pretty sure
right. I think investors do seem to be
banking on an imminent rate cut. Of
course, they've been wrong about this
before, but I think either way you look
at it, the the big story to me or kind
of the big takeaway for me the past few
weeks is that every single decline that
we have in the stock market, you see
individual investors, institutional
investors jumping to buy that dip. You
know, we saw that after that hairy labor
market report just not too long ago. And
I think that's really helped propel
markets. And it marks a pretty big shift
in how markets function these days where
you have this cohort of investors that's
ready to step in, ready to provide
support to the markets on any sign of
weakness. And I think these individual
investors kind of function the way short
sellers did in the past where they would
step in to buy during times of market
panic.
>> And what what do rate cuts do for those
investors? Because it seems like one
reason that the market might rally when
the Federal Reserve is talking about
cutting rates. Because look, the reality
is that the reason that the Fed might
cut rates is because the labor market is
weakening, right? The economy is not
doing that great. So, you would think
that maybe the market would say, "Oh
boy, people are going to lose their
jobs. They're not going to buy stuff.
They're not going to pay back their
debts. Bad for the economy." But maybe
the reason that people are looking at a
rally is because they think that lower
rates will continue to fuel this kind of
retail pouring of money into the market.
Is that the case?
>> Well, look, higher interest rates did
not pour cold water on that trade. So,
it's really unclear how that's going to
shake out. And I I think I think another
thing driving this is that people have
been rewarded for stepping in. You're
seeing Americans finances more
intertwined with the stock market than
they ever have been before. The Journal
recently had an article about how 401ks
have been drifting more and more towards
stocks. Someone I spoke to the other day
mentioned or pointed out that the share
of American net worths that are
concentrated in stocks is hovering
around 36%. That's the highest level in
records going back to the 1950s.
>> Well, the journal had a story that even
in target date funds, which are the sort
of supposed to be the very like classic
sort of conservative investments for
retirement funds, even those are pretty
overweight stocks these days. And while
I take your point about high interest
rates didn't seem to discourage retail
investors a couple of years ago, I do
think that dropping rates from here
could fuel things a little further. A
you have the fact that, you know, people
who might be in cash will be getting
less of a return on that cash,
especially when short-term rates are
cut. Um, and so they'll might move into
risky assets. You also
>> I will point out that people often think
that the second rates move lower, that
money like
pours out of money market funds. That is
not how it's worked. I think money in
money market funds is way stickier than
a lot of people think.
>> Interesting. Interesting. Well, I I I
mean I know that's true for
institutions. I wonder though if maybe
some some just, you know, individuals
might be sort of convinced to like start
investing more of their money. Well,
like I said before, uh we we do have
some upcoming data that I think will be
very relevant and one of them is the
existing home sales report. And what's
interesting about this report is that it
highlights a couple of things. One is
the number of sales happening. Uh the
other is what is in inventory that is
like people who are trying to sell
essentially and then also the prices at
which homes are moving. And the trend
we've been seeing thus far in the data
is that um sales are pretty flat but
inventory is growing. This isn't true in
every region necessarily, but nationally
prices are still kind of moving a little
higher. And that's an interesting
scenario because I think that part of
the case for lower rates is that um the
housing market is stuck, right? Um we
don't have enough people buying houses
and one thing that's discouraging them
are high mortgage rates. And so if we
cut mortgage rates, maybe more of those
people who want to buy will buy. But my
question, Gunjen, is what does that do
to home prices? Do home prices have to
come down too? You know, Neil Da and I
dove into this in our conversation for
this week and he had some really
interesting thoughts on where the
housing market is at right now. You
know, he thinks it's in a recession and
you and I are talking about where's the
economy headed from here. You know, he
mentioned the housing market is such a
big part of the economy that if it's in
trouble, that could spell bad news for
the rest of the economy.
>> Well, so this is the big question I
have. What's essentially worse for the
economy? Is it nobody buying and selling
and therefore nobody going out to, you
know, buy stuff at retailers like Home
Depot and Lowe's, who by the way are
reporting earnings soon, or is it worse
if home prices are falling? People are
buying and selling, but everyone's house
price is coming down because that's the
new market clearing price. And I think
that the conversation that you had with
Neil Data, who is the head of economic
research at Renaissance Macro Research,
will really help us answer that
question. So, we're going to have that
conversation after the break.
Well, Neil, thank you so much for
joining me today. I know we have tons to
dive into with what's going on in the
housing market right now here in the US.
>> Well, I mean, right now the housing
market's probably in a recession. Um,
builders aren't making homes. the labor
markets are very much in focus and um
you know I think probably you start to
see some weakness in construction
employment going forward because you
know right now builders I think are
trying to align their construction
activity with with their sales and sales
have generally been slowing so it's only
natural that construction follows.
>> Yeah. So give me your your 30,000 foot
view here. You've said that the housing
market is in a recession. What
indicators are you watching or what are
you watching that that gets you there?
you look at a variety of indicators. Um,
but obviously if you look at single
family building permits, they're down
over 30%. That's sort of the backbone of
the housing market, single family
residential real estate. So, the fact
that that's down implies that we
probably won't see much construction
activity uh over the course of the year.
Um, if you look at new homes sold um
sold but not started, right? Like so a
home a new home sale is consider is like
booked when the contract is signed,
right? So, it's considered by most
economists to be a leading indicator of
the housing market. Um, the fact that
new homes sold but not yet started,
that's down substantially as well. So,
there's not really much in the pipeline
for new construction. And that's that's
really different from where we were in
2022, right? So, if you go back to that
period, right, remember the Fed started
basically broke the housing market
really without even hiking, right? They
started talking about hiking and then
longerterm interest rates rose and the
housing market cooled off. What kept
builders going at the time was there was
this massive backlog of housing that
they still needed to to get through and
so that kind of kept them busy. Um but
they don't really have that today.
>> Falling employment in the construction
sector can be a really bad sign for the
economy.
>> I mean it's growing at a pace now that's
typically consistent with very very weak
economic activity. Right. So um and as I
say like you you don't really have much
growth in the pipeline. Think about what
builders have been doing over the last
year to kind of move a lot of their
homes, right? They've been offering rate
buyowns. They've been providing all
sorts of incentives to get people to buy
homes um because they have strong
balance sheets. But um that can only go
on for so long. And now, you know, do
you want to keep selling homes at a
reduced margin or do you want to kind of
rightsize your business? And I think a
lot of these builders want to rightsize
their business. And what that basically
means at this point is probably they're
going to be making fewer homes. They're
going to be focusing on the homes
they've already sold, finishing those,
and they're probably going to
rationalize their their labor demands.
>> So, what does that tell us about
consumers right now?
>> Well, I mean, housing is a big part of
um why people spend money? I mean,
homeowners tend to spend more money than
renters because there's a lot of things
that you need to buy if you own a house,
right? I mean, for example, you sign a
contract on a single family new home.
That's usually means single family
detached. It probably comes with a
garage. You fill the house with stuff,
right? Appliances and furniture,
>> always something to renovate,
>> furniture, a car, tools, all sorts of
things. So, there's a multiplier, I
think, from housing uh home sales in
particular to consumer spending. So, to
the extent that housing is weak and
housing construction is weak, it
probably means consumers more generally
are going to be spending less on durable
goods uh you know, for the home. So help
me make sense of this a little bit
because I was looking at some Yardini
research data which showed that
household net worths at a record high in
the first quarter. Okay. I I know sales
have been slowing but home prices still
close to records, right? So how can how
can we say that the housing market is
even doing that badly or that consumers
are are not doing that well when when
net worths are are up there and their
their home values are still up, right?
Is there ever a time in economic cycles
where net worth isn't close to an
all-time high right before the slump?
That's always the case, right? I mean,
in 2007, people are saying the same
thing. The market peaked in October of
that year. Just because you have um I
guess like these like this sort of these
indicators that suggest stability or
like things are fine, that doesn't
necessarily mean that they are, right?
So, um, you know, to me, it's not so
much that household net worth is at an
all-time high. It's that it's the
direction of travel is clearly worse
because home prices are contracting.
They have been now for four or five
months. And um, and that's the primary
asset on most households balance sheet,
not stocks.
>> So, June sales were flat, but inventory
was up, right? And prices were also up.
Do people need a reality check in terms
of how much their homes are worth? Are
they expecting?
>> Well, that's what's happening, right?
And so what one of the things you're
seeing at the moment is that a lot of
sellers are just removing their homes
for sale because they're not getting the
price they want. But that has
ramifications for I mean people because
now and someone that owns a house is
going to know well maybe my house isn't
worth as much as they thought. And if
you believe that, then that means if
your your net worth isn't as strong as
you might have thought, and therefore
maybe you're saving a little bit more
money as a result. And it also would
mean if a lot of the people that are
listing their homes had been listing are
no longer listing, that means that the
inventory that's out there, by the way,
which is still growing, that means no
one really wants that inventory, which
means that those prices will have to
come down even more to move. Um, so
that's again another reason why you
should expect ongoing declines in prices
over the remainder of the year.
>> That sounds like a rude awakening for a
lot of
>> I mean look to me the housing market is
not in a good place. I mean it's it's um
you know Redfin has this statistic where
they talk about how like you know
sellers are outnumbering buyers by a
very very wide margin. But I mean it's
obviously if that's the situation it's
very easy to call for an ongoing decline
in home prices. But I think what's
really important is that the prices are
falling in the markets where the
builders make the homes. For example, I
live in New Jersey, okay? And I could,
my next door neighbor put his home up
for sale maybe a week and a half ago and
it's already under contract. There's not
a lot of uh inventory in the Northeast.
But then again, builders don't really
build a lot of homes up here either
because that's not where the population
is growing the most quickly. Now, if you
go down to like Florida, Texas, Arizona,
inland California,
Georgia, I mean, these are the markets
where the builders make a lot of the
homes. And that's also the places where
you're seeing very, very rapid declines
in home prices. So, to me, that's why
it's more ownorous is because the prices
are falling most na I mean, maybe
nationally it doesn't look that bad on
the surface, but if you look under the
surface, look at the states where the
price declines are steepest. That's also
where the builders make the houses. And
and that is why um you know the uh the
GDP impact might be might be a little
bit uh more precarious this time. And
for economists
what we talk about is residential
investment, right? And residential
investment has three pieces, right?
There's the construction piece, there's
sales. So when when a home is sold, like
the commission that the broker gets gets
booked into GDP, okay? And um and then
renovations, home renovation spending.
Those are the three parts of uh of of
residential investment and construction
is probably you know I would say about
half of it. Okay. Um so right now you
don't really have much in construction
and you have weaker growth in renovation
spending because labor markets are
slowing and credit uses is slowing. So I
mean if you think about housing in those
three terms three in those three parts I
mean it's it's very difficult to to sort
of lay out a very optimistic kind of
thesis right now. So, you think some of
the declines that we've seen in these
pockets of the US could spread through
other parts of the country?
>> I mean, it could, but it doesn't even
have to because that's that's where all
the growth is happening anyway. To me,
my biggest concern is what happens now
with employment.
>> Yeah.
>> Because I think that builders are going
to start laying people off.
>> And when that happens, that to me, you
talk about like a root awakening, that's
the root awakening. I don't think the
Fed really focuses enough on housing
when they talk about like rate cuts. And
I think the reason why you want to focus
on housing is because obviously it's a
very credit sensitive area and also
importantly it's because it has like a
lot of uh spillover effects into other
parts of the economy. Um but to me you
know the fact that there's a potential
down cycle in uh construction employment
I think is very important for um you
know for the Fed to kind of consider.
>> We've been hearing about this
affordability crisis in housing.
Does what you're saying mean that it
could be getting better, but for the
wrong reasons? Maybe.
>> If you have falling rates, that's going
to help uh affordability. Um if the
rates are declining because people are
losing their jobs.
>> Okay. When we had falling rates the past
few years, that didn't help housing
affordability, though.
>> It didn't because prices were rising
more rapidly. Yeah.
>> Why do we think that could happen this
time? I guess the question is, is it a
good thing when rates are coming down
and home prices are coming down because
people are sniffing out economic
weakness? Like that would help
affordability ratios. I don't know that
it would be the best thing for the
economy
>> and in I guess inflation would get
better or
>> Yeah. Inflation would get better because
because there would be more slack in the
labor market and people wouldn't be
making as much money and so prices would
have to adjust lower.
>> So you've said you think the housing
market is in a recession right now. Can
the housing market be in a recession
without the entire economy falling into
a recession?
>> That can happen. It's It's not usual. I
mean, it's not normal. I mean,
>> has it ever happened before?
>> Yeah, we just I mean, we were in a
housing recession in 2022, but we also
had
loads of mana coming down from the
government and we don't really have that
as much these days. So, um I think it's
a it's a more challenging situation,
right? Right. I mean, the labor markets
aren't as strong as they were two two or
three years ago. Uh the government's not
helping as much as they were two or
three years ago. Um you didn't have like
a a synchronized reopening out of COVID
like you did a few years ago globally,
right? I mean, we have trade wars and
things like that. So, I think there's
more headwinds now. So, it would be very
difficult for if the housing market
remains weak. I mean, that's going to
kind of underpin ongoing domestic
weakness. And you know, for me, I've
kind of described the economy uh to our
clients. I mean basically as we have
like sort of three economies right now,
right? You have the housing market which
is in a recession. You have the consumer
which is you know kind of sluggish. Um
and then you have like this AI thing and
in the background that's just like
there's just an insatiable appetite for
and you know as a US economist it's very
difficult to say like oh yeah AI is
going to just overwhelm everything. Like
I don't really believe that. So I think
if if the consumer is weak and housing
is weak um you know to me that's that's
enough to kind of say like you know what
it's going to be very difficult for the
economy to
not have a recession you know so I think
I think for me um the markets are
underpricing the risk of one
>> AI isn't going to save the housing
market. No, I don't think so. I mean, in
some cases it may make things even worse
for people, right? Because um you know,
the immediate consequence of it is
basically to put massive demands on the
electrical grid, right? I mean, so
there's a
>> there's there's huge demand for for
energy because of the AI stuff and
that's going to show up in household
utility bills over the over the next
number of months, years, quarters. and
the the productivity benefits of AI. Um
I mean people talk a lot about it, but
when you look at the data, it's not
really there yet. So there's a bit of a
productivity paradox with this. So um
and it's ultimately going to be useful
in so far as you start to see stronger
investment and real wages, right? And
that hasn't happened. So right now
there's arguably some costs or
externalities maybe associated with with
the AI buildout uh that could be
weighing on consumers and households.
You know, look, I mean, for the economy,
um,
I I guess for me it's it's really you
have to you have to focus on like the
bread and butter and that to me is
basically US housing and the consumer.
>> We are going to take one quick break and
then I have a final question for you.
>> If you had 30 seconds with Fed Chair
Powell to advise him on policy
specifically as it relates to housing,
what would you say?
I would say you should have gone in July
and you should be cutting uh in
September. Um and I would say you should
I guess I would say you should
overweight the growth part of your
mandate relative to
uh inflation because inflation is a
lagging indicator and ultimately um you
know longer run inflation expectations
are anchored. So you should be worried
more about about the growth outlook. To
me, the housing market's been weak for
some time, and if you're looking at
housing, look at what's going on with
home prices. They're contracting. So,
that to me is an important signal. So, I
think it would I would I would tend to
nudge him towards the more dovish uh
side of the fence at the moment.
>> You would say I agree with President
Trump and you should be cutting rates.
>> Uh I wouldn't say it like that, but I
would say you should be cutting rates.
And also, look, I mean, they don't
really have a very good a good rationale
to I mean, he's been asked multiple
times about, you know, how do you think
tariffs are going to be anything other
than a one-off price increase? I mean,
he hasn't actually been able to answer
that question very well. Um, so I think
that's pretty revealing. The New York
Fed put out an interesting survey where
they looked at consumer expectations one
year, three year. It's basically at the
same place it was to start the year. So
that to me suggests that inflation
expectations are anchored. There's
really no threat that it's going to get
unanchored at the moment.
>> They have been the whole time, right?
They never kind of got out of control.
>> I mean, some surveys showed like that it
got out of control, but even those are
improving it lately. So yeah, I think
that to me like the rationale to like
let's hold off because inflation
expectations are potentially going to
come unanchored. I mean there's no
evidence that that's happened. And so I
mean it's their job to make decisions
with imperfect information. You can't
just be like, oh tariffs, something can
happen. Let's not do anything until you
know all the details. Like by the time
you've waited for all the details, it
might get really bad, right? Like so
>> to be fair, it feels like there's a lot
more details. like it seems more
uncertain than usual in terms of policy.
>> I mean, it's their job to make decisions
in an environment of uncertainty. The
argument that I can't really stand these
days is, well, you know, we're much
closer to our unemployment mandate than
we are to our inflation mandate.
Therefore, we should be looking at, you
know, we should be paying we should be
putting more weight on inflation.
Therefore, we should wait. The risk with
that, of course, is that
yes, it's true that the unemployment
rate is at 4.2% 2% and your longer run
estimate is around four%. So you're
closer on unemployment. Fine. But the
labor markets can move a lot more
rapidly than than inflation does, right?
That's also true. So you may be at it
your target today. That doesn't
necessarily guarantee you that's going
to be the case in a few months, right?
>> And you are worried that we're kind of
at that tipping point in terms of the
labor market where things could start to
go.
>> Yeah. I mean, the economy is on thin
ice. The first half of this year, you
saw AI adjacent stuff like information
processing equipment, software that
added more to GDP growth than the
consumer. It's like unprecedented. Like
that's very rare to see that. So you
have a very small slice of the economy
adding more to GDP than the consumer,
which is like the biggest piece of the
economy. So I think that's to me that's
that's a that's a bit concerning. Yeah.
I mean, you can't run an economy just on
AI.
Thank you so much, Neil. This has been
great.
>> Thanks, Kungjan. Appreciate it.
[Music]
>> I know you're warmed up from CNBC.
>> Yeah,
>> although I guess that was a little
shorter. How long was that?
>> It was like 10 minutes.
[Music]